feat: wing cloud launch blog (#535)
winglang/docsite: blog/2023-07-18-wing-cloud-launch.md

---
title: We are not giving up on the cloud!
description: Announcing our seed funding round for Wing Cloud
authors: 
  - eladb
tags: [wing cloud, funding, seed, press release]
hide_table_of_contents: true
---

All comedowns are painful, and it seems like our come down from the cloud's [hype curve] is no
different. A grieving process of an industry. When [@dhh](https://twitter.com/dhh) writes about
["Why we're leaving the cloud"](https://world.hey.com/dhh/why-we-re-leaving-the-cloud-654b47e0) and
Prime Video are [mourning the unexpected costs of serverless], it's not easy to read, especially for

> a cloud believer like myself.

Reviewer: Missing links

Author: added

and a DynamoDB table, and a few Lambda functions, and just last week, the dev team needed a bucket
for something, which reminds me, we only provisioned the staging one, but not the one in
production".

On the outset, the idea of the cloud makes total economic sense. It's the classic
total-cost-of-ownership "buy versus build" enabler. You walk into a huge candy store and pick and
choose the building blocks for your application. All these cool managed services at the palm of your
hand, so you can focus on creating value to *your* users.

But in reality, by transferring some of these aspects of your application to cloud services, it also
means that now these aspects move from the category of "application" and become "infrastructure". In
practice, this means that your application code treats these services as some external entities and
managing them happens in separate tools, workflows and oftentimes, on a separate team.

Now, in order to add a route to my REST API, I need to submit a ticket to my DevOps team, or update
some YAML in some repo that I don't fully understand. And I can only test this new API route in a
shared staging environment. That's not good.

> The complexity is staring to bury us because we are not expressing our intent at the right level.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The complexity is starting to bury us because we are not expressing our intent at the right level.
```

Author: removed this sentence.

So how can we realize the potential of the cloud, but also not burry teams in its complexity? As a
software developer, I'm sorry but I would have to say *abstractions*.

[Yuval Noah-Harari](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Yuval_Noah_Harari) talks about the ability of
**language** to abstract and assign meaning has enabled humans to establish common understandings
and cooperative behaviors over the course of our short history on this planet. Abstractions in

> software are no different.

Author: Added "One of my favorite historians"

We believe that with the right abstractions, the cloud will be able to fullfil its true potential.

> We believe it is possible to establish a better model for building and operating systems with on top

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We believe it is possible to establish a better model for building and operating systems on top
```

of this powerful computing platform through new common understandings and better collaboration
within engineering organizations.

We call this abstraction **Wing Cloud**, and we are excited to share that we've partnered with an
amazing group of investors such as [Battery Ventures](https://www.battery.com/), [Grove
Ventures](https://www.grovevc.com/) and [StageOne Ventures](https://stageonevc.com/) as well as an
incredible crew of [funds and angels](TBD) from across the industry on the journey to turn this idea
into a reality.

**So what is Wing Cloud**? It is a new kind of *abstract cloud*. It doesn’t involve data centers,

> machines, or provisioning engines. Instead, it’s a layer that enable companies to utilize the cloud

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
machines, or provisioning engines. Instead, it’s a layer that enables companies to utilize the cloud
```

Author: done

> machines, or provisioning engines. Instead, it’s a layer that enable companies to utilize the cloud

Author: Changed to "builders"

as a general-purpose computing platform. It does that through a programming and operational model
that spans both infrastructure and application across all cloud providers and services.

Wing Cloud is a unified programming and operational model that spans all providers and services. It
celebrates the choice and flexibility the cloud has to offer without compromising the developer
experience and engineering practices.

> So how does that look like in practice? Our vision for Wing Cloud consists of three main components:

Reviewer 3: I know that dividing things to threes looks good, but I think that we are leaving much of the story behind if we focus on these three only. 
You also discuss more components below, so I would expect them to be features here in the top list too

Author: I think this is fine. It's okay that we have 3 here and a few more sections below. I don't think that's a problem.

> So how does that look like in practice? Our vision for Wing Cloud consists of three main components:

Author: fixed

> 1. A programming language for the cloud, aptly called **Winglang**.

Reviewer 3: I would add the main benefit of each one here, like you did with the console.
So something like:
1. Winglang: a programming language for the cloud that unifies infrastructure and runtime code under the same programatic model
2. Wing Cloud Library (WCL): a high level cloud SDK that abstracts parts of the cloud to allow writing cloud agnostic applications.

Author: Done.

> 2. An high level cloud SDK, aptly called **Wing Cloud Library**.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. A high level cloud SDK, aptly called **Wing Cloud Library**.
```

3. An application-centric operational console, aptly called **Wing Console**.

> ### Why are we building a programming language?

Reviewer: Some kind of visual (screenshot of code, or inlined code snippet) could be helpful to break up the page a bit or add some visual flavor, even if the actual code isn't being explained or walked through

Author: On it

Author: Done

interact with this resource at runtime.

You might be wondering why this couldn't be implemented as a library within an existing language.
This is because existing languages don't have language constructs that can express the distributed
nature of cloud applications. To address this, Winglang has two execution phases: *preflight* and
*inflight*. The preflight phase defines your application's infrastructure and the inflight phase
defines its runtime behavior.

Another way to think about it is *space* versus *time*. Think about programming languages as
storytelling devices. Traditional languages are designed to tell a linear story: first this
happened, then that, and so on. Basically the traditional purpose of programming languages was to
describe a sequence of instructions for the CPU. They tells the story of a program over **time**.

But when it comes to cloud applications, the story is not linear. There are multiple storylines
running together, interacting with and affecting each other. It's not just about what happens
*when*, but also *where*. There's a *spatial dimension* to account for, and it's a dimension our

> current languages are just don't designed to express.

Reviewer: This space/time analogy didn't really click to me on first read. Even after thinking about it for a little longer, I feel a little confused since programs from traditional languages also deal with space and time requirements, right?

Are you trying to express that preflight and inflight correspond to space and time, or that preflight and inflight are orthogonal dimensions/concerns in the same way that space and time are? I wasn't sure totally sure

Reviewer 3: I agree, I think it will not click with many readers because they will compare this to async programing for single machines that also has multiple stories at the same time. 
The difference to the cloud is in the spacial dimension, but it is not really explained here, it is just mentioned without really explaining how it differs from regular async programming for single machines and why it matters on the cloud and needs a new language to support it.

Author: OK, I removed the analogy but I am a bit sad to let it go because it was a good one. LMK what you think.

Reviewer: Yeah, I didn't mean to prescribe a solution (whether to remove it or tweak it etc). Maybe there's some way to rephrase it?

But preflights and inflights are just the tip of the iceberg in terms of what a language for the
cloud can offer. Think about things like API endpoints and clients, telemetry, metrics and alarms,
data schemas, and more. We have plans to bake many of these capabilities into the language and the

> standard library so that developers can truly focus on building their applications.

Reviewer: nit: avoid the word "things" (sounds vague / watered-down)

Author: Done

> ### A standard library for the cloud

Reviewer: I think this could be a great place to mention "wasi-cloud-core" / WebAssembly System Interface as a related technology, to reinforce the idea that we're not the only people that believe a common cloud API layer is something that is feasible / valuable: https://github.com/WebAssembly/wasi-cloud-core

Author: OK, added...

The second piece of the puzzle is what we call the **Wing Cloud Library** (WCL). This is a library
of classes that represent common resources for building cloud applications. You can think of the WCL
as a [standard library](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Standard_library) for the cloud. Similarly to
how standard libraries in traditional languages abstract the operating system, WCL abstracts cloud
providers and services.

We believe the cloud has finally matured to the point where it is possible to establish these
standard abstractions and that they will carry over successfully across public and private cloud
providers. We didn't always have that level of abstraction with standard libraries. When I started
programming, I needed to know exactly which operating system (and even which file system) I was
using in order to write a file. Now, I can just call `writeFile()` and it will work across all
platforms. 

The WCL is designed from the ground up to support multiple targets for each resource. Classes in the
library only define an abstract API, and it is possible to inject concrete implementations at

> compile time (technically this happens when the Wing preflight code is executed by the compiler).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
compile time (technically this happens when "preflight" code is executed by the Wing compiler).
```

Author: removed this

This powerful mechanism means that code written against these APIs is **portable across cloud
providers and provisioning engines**.

And of course, we think of of WCL as the foundation for an ecosystem of cloud abstractions. The
programming model is open and extensible and anyone will be able to publish libraries and implement
backends for existing resources based on the needs of their environment.

The WCL is a major project and it's early days. You can see the coverage of resources and targets
through this [compatibility
matrix](https://www.winglang.io/docs/standard-library/compatibility-matrix) and make sure to "+1"
the relevant issue if coverage is missing.

> Currently, WCL can only be used from Winglang code, but we are considering releasing it to other

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, WCL can only be used from Winglang code, but we are interested in offering it in other
```

languages as well. The WCL is built using CDK technologies such as
[JSII](https://github.com/aws/jsii) and [constructs](https://github.com/aws/constructs), so
technically it is possible to publish it to other languages.

> ### Reducing iteration time from minutes to milliseconds

Reviewer 3: I think it is unexpected to talk about it here since the above two subheadings are explainng the first two main components of the wing cloud as defined above (the language and the SDK). Readers expect you to explain the third one now (the console).

Author: I am going to leave it like this for now. I removed the numbering from the list above so it's less triggering that we don't have affinity between the list of components and the paragraph headings.

that it does what I expected it to do. 

The more an application leans on the cloud, the more this cycle is broken. If for every iteration, I
need to deploy my code to a personal cloud account, it means that a cycle takes multiple minutes
(depending on the resources I deploy). Then, having to switch to some other system to run my code
and trace the logs also increases this iteration time and breaks my development flow.

Some tools are trying to address this problem by "hot swapping" runtime code in the cloud, or by
proxying requests into my local machine so I can debug locally. But those solutions are only partial as they only take care of the runtime code and not on the entire application. If something changes in my infrastructure, I go back to waiting.

I personally believe that in most cases using real cloud resources for development iterations is
never going to get us to developer experience nirvana. This is because when we provision resources
in the cloud, we leverage their [control plane](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Control_plane), which,
by definition, is not optimized for latency.

> In Wing, thanks to the cloud abstraction layer, we are able to take a different approach. The same mechanism we have for cloud portability is used to implement a local cloud simulation target for each resource in the WCL. This means that my entire Wing application can run in a local machine and functionally tested.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Wing, thanks to the cloud abstraction layer, we are able to take a different approach. The same mechanism we have for portability across clouds is used to implement a local cloud simulation target for each resource in the WCL. This means that my entire Wing application can run in a local machine and functionally tested.
```

> ### Tests as first-class citizens

Reviewer: Maybe we could say a few words about the pains of stubbing and mocking (because these are harder / more painful to do in current cloud development because of network latencies and credentials and permissions etc.)

> We love tests. We think tests are likely the most important asset a software team builds. Our code

Reviewer 3: The change in tone (from first-person to third person) here was unexpected to me

Author: fixed

can be changed and refactored as much as we like, but our tests capture the expectations from our
system.

The reality of the cloud today is that it is almost impossible to write effective tests that cover
more than just the application code. With Wing, this can now change.

The fact we have a simulator means that it is now possible to **write unit tests** which not only
validate my runtime code, but also how this code is interacting with the infrastructure around it
and with other pieces of my system.

To that end, the Wing language, the SDK and the Wing Console all work together to offer first-class
support for [cloud testing](https://www.winglang.io/docs/concepts/tests).

<!--![screenshot]()-->

Tests in Wing are multi-cloud by default and can all run in parallel because they use cloud
functions as their compute resource. Every test you write can be execute locally in the cloud
simulator and can also be deployed and executed across all supported cloud providers.

We believe that being able to run and test cloud applications locally is a game changer for

> developers. It's definitely a game changer for us!

Reviewer: This paragraph is on the weaker side to me

Author: ok removed it. not sure why you didn't like it but whateverrrrrr

castle. I've finished building my castle, and now I now I want to open the main gate. I log into the
provider's console and I see a menu of Lego block types: all the reds, all the 4 piece blues, all
the flat surfaces, etc. My gate is built out of reds and blues and greens and a bunch of cables. But
I can't see a gate. I just see the building blocks from which it's constructed. How would I know
which blue piece to move and where in order to open the gate?

This is the experience we have today when we operate applications in the cloud. We get an alarm that
there are some errors from some Lambda function. How do we know which part of system is affected?
Which team owns this part?

The solution, today, is dashboards. I have to manually craft these views to represent the mental
model of my system. I take the red and green and blue pieces and arrange them together under the
title "Gate", and now if there's an error, I can tell where it belongs.

It goes back to the *space and time* analogy. The operational experience of Wing Console is based on
Wing's *spacial view* of the system. Every resource or event can be *traced back* to the logical

> unit it belongs to. This is basically the purpose of stack traces in traditional languages - an

Reviewer: (optional)
```suggestion
unit it belongs to, based on your source code. This is basically the purpose of stack traces in traditional languages - an
```

exception is thrown and the stack trace helps me trace back from low-level to high-level so I can
diagnose the problem.

### Fully customizable below the abstraction

We are not naive to think that we can create an abstraction that will cover all use cases and
possible setups. In fact, Wing is designed from the ground up to *celebrate cloud choice and
diversity* and includes multiple levels of extensibility and customizability.

One dimension of extensibility is support for any resource from the IAC ecosystem of the target as
first-class citizens. For example, if you compile you Wing code to Terraform (`tf-aws`, `tf-azure`,

> `tf-gcp`), then you can use any resource in the [Terraform Registry](registry.terraform.io) in your

Reviewer: These shorthand strings might be unfamiliar / confusing to someone that hasn't used the Wing CLI. I'm not sure how much information they're adding here

Author: removed

> first-class citizens. For example, if you compile you Wing code to Terraform (`tf-aws`, `tf-azure`,
> `tf-gcp`), then you can use any resource in the [Terraform Registry](registry.terraform.io) in your

Reviewer: ```suggestion
first-class citizens. For example, if you compile you Wing code to Terraform (`tf-aws`, `tf-azure`,
`tf-gcp`), then you can use any resource in the [Terraform Registry](https://registry.terraform.io) in your
```

> Wing code. If you compile to AWS CDK, you can use any [AWS CDK
> construct](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cdk/api/v2/) in your code (L1s, L2s and any construct library
> from the [Construct Hub](https://constructs.dev/)). Naturally, if you use any of these resources,

Reviewer: (optional)
```suggestion
Wing code. If you compile to AWS CDK (leveraging CloudFormation to provision resources), you can use any [AWS CDK
construct](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cdk/api/v2/) in your code (L1s, L2s and any construct library
from the [Construct Hub](https://constructs.dev/)). Naturally, if you use any of these resources,
```

they will only work when deploying to the cloud, but there is built-in support in Wing for providing
a local implementation for them.

Another dimension is what we call [Wing Compiler
Plugins](https://www.winglang.io/docs/tools/compiler-plugins). Those are hooks implemented through
JavaScript functions that can customize the output of the Wing compiler. These plugins are extremely
powerful and work **below the abstraction line**. This means that they can utilize capabilities that
are provider-specific, **enforce policies**, **apply compliance rules**, etc. We believe these
plugins can be used by platform and centralized cloud teams to enforce and apply common standards
within a company in a streamlined ways for developers.

### We are just getting started

> We believe in the cloud. We believe in it's economic sense, it's diversity and choice. We believe

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We believe in the cloud. We believe in its economic sense, its diversity and choice. We believe
```

Reviewer: diversity and choice sort of sound like the same thing on my first read, maybe use a different third thing? not sure

Author: rephrased

hide_table_of_contents: true
---

All comedowns are painful, and it seems like our come down from the cloud's [hype
curve](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gartner_hype_cycle) is no different. When
[@dhh](https://twitter.com/dhh) writes about ["Why we're leaving the
cloud"](https://world.hey.com/dhh/why-we-re-leaving-the-cloud-654b47e0) and Prime Video are
[mourning the unexpected costs of
serverless](https://www.primevideotech.com/video-streaming/scaling-up-the-prime-video-audio-video-monitoring-service-and-reducing-costs-by-90),
it's not easy to read, especially for a cloud believer like myself.

And even if companies are not stocking up on server racks, there's a strong sentiment of compromise.
The complexity is overwhelming and teams are struggling to set up reasonable development
environments, test their systems or deploy them across multiple public providers or private clouds. 

I don't think I've ever talked to a platform team that feels like they got it right, or to a DevOps
engineer that didn't feel they are a bottleneck. I hear frustration and apologies "I know this is
not ideal, but we've got to give developers a way to develop". When I talk to enterprises, many of

> them are in “analysis paralysis”. Which cloud provider do we sell our souls to? Are we a serverless

Reviewer: nit: In a lot of writing I've seen, periods tend to go inside quotes at an end of a sentence

Author: done

Author: There's a whole philosophy behind it (UK/US I think).

When I started programming, I needed to know exactly which operating system, and even which file
system, I was using in order to write a file. Now, I can just call `writeFile()` and it will work
across all platforms. Other projects in the industry such as
[wasi-cloud-core](https://github.com/WebAssembly/wasi-cloud-core) have also reached a similar
conclusion.

The WCL is designed from the ground up to support multiple targets for each resource. Classes in the
library only define an abstract API, and it is possible to inject concrete implementations at
compile time. This powerful mechanism means that code written against these APIs is **portable
across cloud providers and provisioning engines**.

And of course, we think of WCL as the foundation for an ecosystem of cloud libraries. The
programming model is open and extensible and anyone will be able to publish libraries and implement
backends for existing resources based on the needs of their environment.

The WCL is a major project and in its early days. You can see the coverage of resources and targets
through this [compatibility
matrix](https://www.winglang.io/docs/standard-library/compatibility-matrix) and make sure to "+1"

> the relevant issue if coverage is missing.

Reviewer: Maybe
```suggestion
the relevant GitHub issue if coverage is missing.
```

castle. I've finished building my castle, and now I want to open the main gate. I log into the
provider's console and I see a menu of Lego block types: all the reds, all the 4 piece blues, all
the flat surfaces, etc. My gate is built out of reds and blues and greens and a bunch of cables. But
I can't see a gate. I just see the building blocks from which it's constructed. How would I know
which blue piece to move and where in order to open the gate?

This is the experience we have today when we operate applications in the cloud. We get an alarm that
there are some errors from some Lambda function. How do we know which part of the system is
affected? Which team owns this part?

The solution, today, is dashboards. I have to manually craft these views to represent the mental
model of my system. I take the red and green and blue pieces and arrange them together under the
title "Gate", and now if there's an error, I can tell where it belongs.

It goes back to the *space and time* analogy. The operational experience of Wing Console is based on
Wing's *spacial view* of the system. Every resource or event can be *traced back* to the logical

> unit it belongs to, based on your source code. This is basically the purpose of stack traces in

Reviewer: Might need to add the space and time analogy back or reword this

Author: fuck

Author: reworded

shop or a Kubernetes shop? Do we now need to teach all developers how to configure a VPC?.

When I talk to Kubernetes shops, I hear denial. It usually starts with "everything is in our
Kubernetes", and then, "Oh, yes, we have these couple of queues, and a CDN, and a DynamoDB table,
and a few Lambda functions, and just last week, the dev team needed a bucket for something, which
reminds me, we only provisioned the staging one, but not the one in production".

On the outset, the idea of the cloud makes total economic sense. It's the classic
total-cost/buy-versus-build enabler. You step into a huge candy store and pick-and-choose the
building blocks for your application. All these managed services at the palm of your hand, so you
can focus on creating value to your users.

But in reality, transferring aspects of your application to cloud services also means that now these
aspects move from the category of "application" and become "infrastructure". In practice, it means
that your code now treats these services as external entities, and managing them happens in separate
tools, workflows, and oftentimes, in separate teams.

> So now, in order to add a route to my API gateway, I need to submit a ticket. or I have to update

Reviewer 4: Is it ok to have a . and a non capital letter here?

across all platforms. Other projects in the industry such as
[wasi-cloud-core](https://github.com/WebAssembly/wasi-cloud-core) have also reached a similar
conclusion.

The WCL is designed from the ground up to support multiple targets for each resource. Classes in the
library only define an abstract API, and it is possible to inject concrete implementations at
compile time. This powerful mechanism means that code written against these APIs is **portable
across cloud providers and provisioning engines**.

And of course, we think of WCL as the foundation for an ecosystem of cloud libraries. The
programming model is open and extensible and anyone will be able to publish libraries and implement
backends for existing resources based on the needs of their environment.

The WCL is a major project and in its early days. You can see the coverage of resources and targets
through this [compatibility
matrix](https://www.winglang.io/docs/standard-library/compatibility-matrix) and make sure to "+1"
the relevant GitHub issue if coverage is missing.

![](./assets/matrix.png)

Currently, WCL only supports Winglang, but we are interested in offering it in other languages as

> well. The library is built using CDK technologies such as [JSII](https://github.com/aws/jsii) and
> [constructs](https://github.com/aws/constructs), so technically it is possible to publish it to
> other languages.

Reviewer 4: I would consider removing this CDK and JSII part, the implementation details here are not relevant here IMO
```suggestion
well. 
```

title "Gate", and now if there's an error, I can tell where it belongs.

The operational experience of Wing Console is based on Wing's preflight structure of the system.
Every resource or event can be *traced back* to the logical unit it belongs to, based on your source
code. This is basically the purpose of stack traces in traditional languages - an exception is
thrown and the stack trace helps me trace back from low-level to high-level so I can diagnose the
problem.

### Fully customizable below the abstraction

We are not naive to think that we can create an abstraction that will cover all use cases and
possible setups. In fact, Wing is designed from the ground up to *celebrate cloud choice and
diversity* and includes multiple levels of extensibility and customizability.

One dimension of extensibility is support for any resource from the IAC ecosystem of the target as
first-class citizens. For example, if you compile your code to a Terraform target, you can use any
resource in the [Terraform Registry](https://registry.terraform.io). If you compile to AWS
CDK/CloudFormation, you can use any [AWS CDK construct](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cdk/api/v2/) in

> your code (L1s, L2s and any construct library from the [Construct Hub](https://constructs.dev/)).

Reviewer 4: I would remove the L1, L2 reference, I assume that the reader that will know about the CDK will know about L1,L2 and the construct hub
```suggestion
your code.
```

---
title: Announcing Wing Cloud

> description: We are not giving up on the cloud

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure how many of our readers will feel like there is a strong movement to abandon the cloud.
I also think the description should be more positive if possible, so something like:
"Our vision for Wing Cloud" or "Helping developers to build above the clouds" or something else that is more inspirational

Ventures](https://www.battery.com), [Grove Ventures](https://www.grovevc.com) and [StageOne
Ventures](https://stageonevc.com/), as well as an incredible crew of [funds and
angels](https://wing.cloud/about#backed-by) from across the industry on the journey to turn this
idea into a reality.

**So what is Wing Cloud?** It is a new kind of *abstract cloud*. It doesn’t involve data centers,
machines, or provisioning engines. Instead, it’s a layer that enables builders to harness this
general-purpose computing platform through a programming and operational model that unifies both
infrastructure and application, and works across all cloud providers and services. It celebrates the
choice and flexibility the cloud has to offer without compromising the developer experience and
engineering practices.

So, what does that look like in practice? Our vision for Wing Cloud consists of three main
components:

 * **Winglang** - A programming language for the cloud which unifies infrastructure and runtime code
   under a single model.
 * **Wing Cloud Library** - A high-level SDK for writing cloud applications that can be deployed to
   all providers and run locally in a simulator

>  * **Wing Console** - A visual application-centric operations and management console.

Reviewer 3: I still think it would be better to put the main blocks here so people who stop here get a fuller picture, and to stimulate others to continue to read the details.
What I miss here is a bullet point about the toolchain that helps developers with local development (testing, debugging, visualisation, etc.) and cutting iteration speed. It will also make more sense because you added subheadings below that talk about these in detail

```suggestion
  * ** Local Development Toolchain** - A set of tools for testing, debugging, visualizing and interacting with cloud applications locally in order to increase iteration speed.
  * **Wing Console** - A visual application-centric operations and management console.
```
